CODEX AGENTIC SNOWBALL BATCH 03

MISSION

Continue the Agentic Snowball without weakening the standard.

The repository currently has 52 contracted modules, 27 full Agent Fast Path v2 modules, and 25 partial modules. Batch 03 must do two things in this order:

1. Repair the semantic defects exposed by the independent Batch 02 audit and prevent those exact regressions from returning.
2. Migrate exactly ten additional highest-leverage partial modules to the existing Agent Contract v2 standard using repository-native impact/dependency information.

If exactly ten unique partial modules are migrated and no concurrent repository change alters the total, the expected final state is 37 full and 15 partial modules.

The purpose is not to create more metadata. The purpose is to make correct reuse cheaper, safer, and more deterministic for future coding agents.

Keep the central rule:

Agents should consume the cheapest sufficient representation first.

Do not make the agent smarter by forcing it to reread the repository. Make the repository cheaper to reason about.


START HERE

Work in the repository root.

Read AGENTS.md first.

Before broad source inspection, run:

python3 tools/query-reference.py agent bootstrap
python3 tools/query-reference.py agent doctor

Record the baseline counts and current commit.

Use the existing Agent Fast Path for discovery before opening canonical source files.

Do not redesign Agent Fast Path v2.
Do not invent a new metadata system.
Do not add a new schema version.
Do not replace the query interface.
Do not add a database, binary index, daemon, server, LSP, chatbot, network dependency, or generated binary artifact.
Do not change Zig from 0.14.0.
Do not commit or push.


PART A — SEMANTIC REPAIR BEFORE FURTHER SNOWBALLING

The independent merged-main Batch 02 audit found at least two mechanically valid but semantically misleading Agent Fast Path projections.

Repair them from canonical truth. Do not alter implementation behavior merely to make metadata convenient.

A1. dynamic-array borrowing/invalidation coherence

The current dynamic-array integrate card reports an empty borrowing set while also reporting that items slices and element pointers are invalidated by capacity growth or deinit.

Inspect the canonical dynamic-array details contract, public signatures, implementation, and tests only as needed.

The resulting full Agent Contract must accurately express the borrowing behavior of items() and constItems(). In particular, if those methods return slices into container-owned storage, state that directly, distinguish mutable/immutable borrowed views where useful, and make the lifetime/invalidation relationship consistent with growth, deinit, pop, clear, or any other supported mutation semantics.

Do not overclaim. Preserve uncertainty where canonical material is genuinely uncertain.

The final generated integrate card must not simultaneously claim no borrowing and then invalidate borrowed slices.

A2. riscv-sv39-page-table-entry construction identity

The current integrate card uses DecodeError as the primary construction symbol and says to construct DecodeError. That is not a useful integration entry point for a page-table-entry module unless canonical source proves that the module itself is actually centered on constructing that error type.

Inspect the canonical public surface and implementation.

Choose the real public integration symbol and construction/minimal-usage path supported by the module. The resulting card must guide an agent toward the page-table-entry functionality rather than an incidental error type.

Do not guess a symbol. Derive it from the public API.

A3. bounded semantic audit of the ten Batch 02 migrations

Audit only the ten modules migrated in Batch 02 for the same class of compression defects:

- borrowing contradicts invalidation or returned slice/pointer lifetimes;
- construction primary symbol is incidental, error-only, or otherwise not the real integration entry point;
- minimal_usage is an import-only placeholder when canonical public usage can be stated safely;
- generic text such as “Construct X as documented by its public API” hides a concrete construction path that is already known;
- error_map assigns every error to every operation when the public surface supports a narrower mapping;
- resource_profile contradicts allocator/storage behavior;
- environment or determinism claims are stronger than canonical evidence;
- copy residue from unrelated modules leaks into the agent projection.

The Batch 02 migration set is:

binary-cursor-checkpoint
validated-enum-decoder
bounded-binary-sub-reader
dynamic-array
bit-set
physical-page-frame-number-and-address-conversion
riscv-sv39-page-table-entry
riscv-sv39-virtual-address-indexing
riscv-page-table-page-owner
bounded-integer

This is a bounded semantic audit, not a rewrite campaign. Repair only facts that can be grounded in canonical contracts, public signatures, source behavior, or tests.

Do not invent diagnostics or proof evidence merely to make a card look richer.

A4. regression protection using existing infrastructure

Add narrow regression assertions to the existing appropriate fast-path/contract test infrastructure so the two independently observed defects cannot silently return.

Prefer extending tools/test-agent-fast-path.py or another already-existing test surface. Do not create a new framework.

At minimum, regression coverage must establish:

- dynamic-array’s generated integrate representation exposes the real borrowed-view semantics consistently with invalidation;
- riscv-sv39-page-table-entry’s generated construction information points at the actual functional integration surface rather than DecodeError or another incidental error-only symbol.

If the correct public symbol must first be discovered from canonical source, make the regression assert that discovered canonical fact.

Do not attempt to encode subjective “good metadata” heuristics as a giant validator. Keep this narrow and evidence-backed.


PART B — SELECT THE NEXT TEN PARTIAL MODULES MECHANICALLY

After Part A is clean, recompute the current partial frontier from the actual tree.

Do not blindly copy the previous report’s ranking. Use current repository data.

For every remaining partial module, use existing commands such as:

python3 tools/query-reference.py agent pending
python3 tools/query-reference.py agent impact MODULE
python3 tools/query-reference.py dependencies MODULE --recursive
python3 tools/query-reference.py dependents MODULE --recursive

Rank candidates using the same mechanical priorities established by the snowball:

1. transitive dependents unlocked or improved;
2. direct dependents improved;
3. removal of partial foundations from already-full module closures;
4. recipe participation and recipe-closure completion;
5. low-level primitive reuse;
6. coherent cluster completion where multiple selected modules reduce future choice/inspection cost together.

Do not invent a synthetic precision score unless the repository already defines one.

The Batch 02 report identified the following likely frontier, but it is advisory only and must be recomputed:

- remaining Sv39 walker/invalidation/builder chain;
- length-prefixed-binary-field;
- physical-memory-region-set;
- elf64-file-header-parser;
- validated-bit-flags;
- then other high-leverage recipe participants or graph foundations.

Select exactly ten unique modules that are partial at the start of Part B.

Explain why each was selected using graph/recipe/closure evidence.

Do not count Part A repairs to already-full modules as migrations.


PART C — MIGRATE THE TEN SELECTED MODULES TO AGENT CONTRACT V2

Use the existing standard exactly.

For each selected module, author only facts supported by canonical truth.

A full Agent Contract v2 projection must be useful for ordinary selection and integration without requiring source inspection when the canonical repository already contains the necessary information.

Populate the existing v2 fields as appropriate, including:

- selection_priority
- alternatives
- use_when
- do_not_use_when
- capabilities
- environment_constraints
- resource_profile
- construction
- operation_map
- error_map
- ownership
- borrowing
- invalidation
- failure guarantees/effects where supported
- composition
- determinism
- known_gaps
- minimal_usage
- integration_notes
- focused validation commands

Respect derived-vs-authored boundaries already established by the repository.

Never make a compact projection more confident or less restrictive than canonical truth.

Preserve unknowns explicitly.

Do not fabricate proof contracts.
Do not fabricate diagnostics.
Do not fabricate misuse fixtures.
Do not mark future-analyzer behavior as compiler-tested.
Do not call unit/smoke evidence formal proof.

Source remains authoritative when debugging or modifying implementation. The goal is to eliminate unnecessary source reads for ordinary discovery, selection, composition, and correct integration.


PART D — KEEP THE ROOT VISION INTACT

The following two flagship documents intentionally belong at repository root:

MAYBE_THE_NEW_WORLD_FITS_IN_5_GB.md
Prospectively.md

They must remain there.

The strict root-document policy must remain strict. Do not broaden it to permit arbitrary root Markdown.

Verify that an unapproved temporary Markdown file at root is rejected, then remove the temporary file before completion.

Do not move the two flagship documents back under docs/.


PART E — COMMANDS.md IS MANDATORY ON EVERY CODEX RUN

Every Codex run that changes this repository must review and update COMMANDS.md before completion.

This requirement is permanent for this workstream.

For this batch:

- update the Agent Fast Path full/partial counts to the final actual state;
- document any newly introduced runnable command, changed argument, changed validation behavior, or changed workflow;
- if no command surface changed, still update COMMANDS.md with the materially established current agent-readability/validation state from this run;
- never document a command that does not exist;
- do not claim a validation status that was not actually executed.

Finish by running:

PYTHONDONTWRITEBYTECODE=1 python3 tools/check-command-reference.py --check

COMMANDS.md must be current when the run ends.


PART F — MEASURE THE SNOWBALL HONESTLY

Create:

docs/reports/AGENTIC_SNOWBALL_BATCH_03.md

The report must include:

1. baseline commit and starting counts;
2. the Part A semantic defects repaired and the canonical evidence used;
3. whether the other eight Batch 02 modules contained additional demonstrable semantic projection defects;
4. the ten newly selected partial modules and their mechanical leverage rationale;
5. before/after full and partial counts;
6. unique direct/transitive dependents improved;
7. recipes whose closure gained additional full modules;
8. exact select/integrate stdout byte counts before and after for the ten newly migrated modules when practical;
9. source files required for ordinary selection/integration before vs after using the same methodology as prior batches;
10. representative fast-path selection, composition, impact, and repair/missing-capability behavior;
11. deterministic index regeneration result;
12. all validation commands actually executed and their outcomes;
13. the next recomputed partial frontier.

Do not present card byte growth as a performance regression by itself. The relevant question is whether the smallest sufficient representation avoids deeper, more expensive reads and wrong choices.

Do not invent token counts when only byte counts were measured.

Do not claim OSIR, CCU, DCR, or other agentic metrics were benchmarked unless a controlled protocol actually measured them.

If you discuss them conceptually, label them conceptual rather than empirical.


PART G — FAST-PATH ACCEPTANCE

After migration, exercise the existing agent interface against the newly full modules.

At minimum verify:

- bootstrap returns the final actual full/partial count;
- doctor is status ok;
- agent decide can select at least one newly migrated module from a natural-language need and explain/reject alternatives correctly;
- select and integrate cards for representative new modules expose useful constraints and construction without source access;
- agent compose crosses foundations from Batch 01, Batch 02, and Batch 03 when a real capability composition supports it;
- a nonexistent capability remains missing rather than being guessed;
- impact for a selected high-leverage module returns the expected dependent/validation surface;
- nonexistent diagnostics remain absent rather than fabricated;
- the two Part A regression cases return corrected cards;
- generation is deterministic.

Do not manufacture a diagnostic merely so diagnostic lookup has something to return.


PART H — VALIDATION

Run focused validation while editing rather than waiting until the end.

Before final completion, run every applicable gate below and repair failures caused by this work:

python3 tools/query-reference.py agent bootstrap
python3 tools/query-reference.py agent doctor

PYTHONDONTWRITEBYTECODE=1 python3 tools/format-module-contracts.py --check
PYTHONDONTWRITEBYTECODE=1 python3 tools/validate-agent-contracts.py --self-test
PYTHONDONTWRITEBYTECODE=1 python3 tools/build-agent-index.py --check
PYTHONDONTWRITEBYTECODE=1 python3 tools/check-command-reference.py --check
PYTHONDONTWRITEBYTECODE=1 python3 tools/test-agent-fast-path.py

node tools/check-port-contracts.js

zig fmt --check .
zig build validate-agent-contracts --summary all
zig build check --summary all
zig build smoke --summary all
zig build test --summary all
zig build recipes --summary all
zig build conformance --summary all
zig build validate-repository --summary all

git diff --check

Also run every focused unit/smoke command for modules whose canonical contracts were changed when those commands are not already clearly covered by a stronger executed aggregate gate.

Regenerate generated agent indexes from canonical contracts, then run the generator a second time and verify the second pass produces no diff.

Verify no temporary root-policy test file remains.

Verify both flagship root documents still exist at root.

Verify the repository remains text-only according to its policy.


PART I — FINAL QUALITY BAR

Do not stop merely because JSON validates.

A module is not “full” for this project merely because required fields are populated. Its compact card must tell a future agent the right thing.

Before marking the batch complete, ask for every newly full or repaired module:

- Would an agent choose this module for the right reasons?
- Would it reject the module for the right reasons?
- Does construction point at the actual integration entry point?
- Are ownership and borrowing internally consistent?
- Do invalidation rules match returned views/pointers?
- Are error mappings operation-specific where canonical truth supports that precision?
- Are resource and environment claims conservative?
- Is minimal_usage actually useful?
- Can ordinary integration proceed from the card plus dependency closure without opening source?
- Does the card avoid claims that the canonical source cannot support?

Prefer an honest partial fact over a polished false one.


PART J — SCOPE CONTROL

Do not add unrelated modules or features.
Do not redesign the standard.
Do not refactor working implementation code just for aesthetics.
Do not rewrite every old contract.
Do not turn this batch into a general metadata-linter project.
Do not weaken strict repository policy.
Do not change the flagship vision documents except where a demonstrable broken link/path caused by prior movement must be corrected.
Do not commit or push.

The batch succeeds by increasing trustworthy foothold density while keeping reasoning cost bounded.


EXPECTED END STATE

If the repository begins Part B at 27 full / 25 partial and no concurrent changes alter the module count:

52 contracted modules
37 full Agent Fast Path v2 modules
15 partial modules

If current counts differ because main advanced, report the actual baseline and require exactly ten partial-to-full migrations from that baseline instead of forcing stale numbers.

The two semantic defects from the independent Batch 02 audit are repaired and regression-tested.
The ten Batch 02 modules have received a bounded semantic coherence audit.
The next ten partial modules are migrated using current repository-native leverage.
COMMANDS.md is current.
The two flagship root documents remain at root.
All generated indexes are deterministic.
The full repository validation gate passes.

Do not commit or push.

Finish only when the requested work is complete and the final line of your response is exactly:

AGENTIC SNOWBALL BATCH 03 PASSED
