CODEX AGENTIC SNOWBALL BATCH 16 — BOUNDED FREESTANDING PHYSICAL MEMORY OWNERSHIP

MISSION

Advance Alpz toward active virtual memory by exactly one foundational step:

CONNECT THE EXISTING PHYSICAL-MEMORY REGION AND PAGE-FRAME ALLOCATION MACHINERY TO THE REAL FREESTANDING RISC-V EXECUTION PATH THROUGH AN EXPLICITLY LINKER-OWNED, PAGE-ALIGNED PHYSICAL PAGE POOL, AND PROVE OWNERSHIP, BOUNDS, ALLOCATION, RELEASE, EXHAUSTION, AND REAL MEMORY ACCESS WITHOUT ACTIVATING SV39 OR INVENTING A GENERAL PLATFORM MEMORY MANAGER.

Batch 15 proved:

real RISC-V rdtime
→ bounded real supervisor timer interrupts
→ sret returns
→ recorded machine observations
→ existing target-neutral BoundedDeterministicScheduler
→ deterministic readiness/order outside interrupt context
→ unchanged canonical Morphic semantics

Batch 16 intentionally leaves time and scheduling alone and begins the memory-foundation path required for later page tables, address spaces, U-mode, syscalls, ELF userspace, and Linux userspace compatibility.

The repository already contains reusable memory foundations, especially:

projects/35-physical-memory-region-set
projects/36-physical-page-frame-allocator
projects/18-distinct-memory-address-types
projects/28-physical-page-frame-number-and-address-conversion

It also contains later Sv39-oriented modules, but Batch 16 must not activate paging merely because those modules exist.

The intended bridge is:

freestanding ELF/linker layout
→ explicitly reserved page-aligned linker-owned memory pool
→ mechanically proven pool begin/end symbols
→ truthful PhysicalMemoryRegionSet usable region
→ existing PhysicalPageFrameAllocator
→ bounded allocation/release/exhaustion exercise
→ direct real memory access only while Bare translation is proven
→ independent verifier checks every allocated frame lies inside the owned pool
→ previous Batch 12/13/14/15 proofs remain intact
→ canonical Morphic bytes remain exact

This is NOT an Sv39 activation batch.
This is NOT a virtual-address-space batch.
This is NOT a U-mode batch.
This is NOT a syscall batch.
This is NOT a Linux ABI batch.
This is NOT hardware memory-map discovery.
This is NOT a DTB parser batch.
This is NOT a general production physical-memory manager.

It is the smallest truthful step from “we possess reusable physical-memory primitives” to “our real freestanding kernel owns and safely exercises a bounded set of actual page frames.”


CANONICAL BATCH 15 BASELINE

The merged Batch 15 revision independently reproduced by the maintainer is:

8779bab919e31abf84e3601f874cd1e388451a08

The maintainer reproduced this revision locally with Zig 0.14.0 and QEMU 11.0.3 and observed:

- Batch 14 repeated-tick self-test PASS;
- Batch 15 rejection-oriented self-test PASS;
- two real Batch 14 QEMU runs with four monotonic cause-5 timer deliveries and four returns each;
- two real Batch 15 QEMU runs with four real rdtime observations each;
- identity rdtime→scheduler mapping;
- readiness [1,2,0,1];
- stable selection [1@0,2@1,3@1,4@3];
- scheduler decisions after the corresponding sret returns;
- Batch 12/13/14 preservation;
- exact native/fake/two-machine Morphic equality at 765 bytes;
- repository validation 322/322 steps and 206/206 tests;
- 53 contracted modules, 53 full agent-readable, 0 partial.

If an immutable Batch 15 evidence tag exists by the time this task runs, preserve it exactly. Do not move, recreate, delete, or repurpose any historical evidence tag. Do not create a new milestone tag unless explicitly requested by the maintainer.

Earlier historical anchors remain immutable.


FIRST EXECUTABLE GATE

Before implementing Batch 16, establish the supplied checkout's current truth.

Resolve repository root and current HEAD.
Read AGENTS.md and COMMANDS.md first.
Use the repository's canonical Python environment/bootstrap if required.

Run at minimum:

python3 tools/verify-freestanding-riscv64-scheduler-time.py --self-test
python3 tools/verify-freestanding-riscv64-scheduler-time.py

Batch 16 begins only if the current checkout genuinely preserves the Batch 15 real-machine proof.

Do not weaken, skip, replace, or reinterpret this gate.
If QEMU or another required executable dependency is genuinely unavailable, report that truth and do not claim the real-machine gate passed.


WHY PHYSICAL MEMORY OWNERSHIP IS NEXT

Batch 15's report identified bounded timeout/wake orchestration as the smallest continuation of the timer/scheduler line unless active virtual-memory ownership became the independently prioritized foundation.

For the long-horizon Alpz goal, memory ownership is now the prioritized foundation.

The intended future ladder is approximately:

owned physical frames
→ active Sv39 page tables
→ controlled kernel mappings
→ U-mode entry/return
→ syscall boundary
→ user address spaces
→ ELF userspace loading
→ process/file-descriptor/VFS work
→ Linux userspace contracts
→ real Alpine userspace

Do not skip directly to a later rung.

Batch 16 should also be a Snowball test: the repository already solved physical regions and page-frame allocation as reusable target-neutral components. The new work should primarily compose those capabilities into the real machine path rather than invent a second allocator.


Z-REF EXECUTION DOCTRINE

Treat the repository as accumulated executable knowledge.

Before broad source reading, use the Agent Fast Path / preflight / contract surfaces to determine:

- canonical physical-region implementation;
- canonical page-frame allocator implementation;
- exact public operations and error contracts;
- page size and physical-address/frame conversion semantics;
- allocator capacity and exhaustion semantics;
- ownership and release semantics;
- failure atomicity and rejection behavior;
- current freestanding linker layout;
- current stack placement;
- current execution translation mode / satp truth;
- focused validation commands;
- dependencies needed by the freestanding target.

Construct a compact Task Projection before implementation and record it in the Batch 16 report.

At minimum record:

requested capability
reused modules
machine-specific adapter boundary
owned pool definition
page size
pool capacity
linker symbols
translation-mode assumption and evidence
allocation/release invariants
rejection cases
unknowns
non-claims
minimum trustworthy read set
focused validators
preservation validators
success evidence
Snowball Yield

Do not create a new reusable module merely because this is a new Batch number.
If the existing physical-memory modules already express the required semantics, reuse them directly.
If a genuine correctness defect is discovered in an existing module, repair the smallest canonical layer and add regression evidence rather than routing around it.


OWNERSHIP RULE

Batch 16 must not call arbitrary QEMU RAM “free memory.”

Do not infer ownership merely from a platform address range such as 0x80000000 onward.
Do not allocate from memory merely because it appears writable.
Do not overwrite OpenSBI, the loaded kernel image, stack, evidence storage, MMIO, DTB memory, or any region whose ownership has not been established.

Instead establish ownership mechanically through the freestanding image itself.

Preferred design:

- extend the existing freestanding linker layout with one fixed-capacity, page-aligned NOLOAD physical page pool;
- expose explicit linker symbols such as pool begin/end using repository-consistent names;
- ensure the pool occupies bytes reserved as part of the kernel image's own memory extent;
- keep the pool disjoint from text, rodata, data, ordinary bss, stack, and other explicitly reserved regions;
- use the exact linker-derived begin/end values at runtime;
- register only that exact range as usable for the Batch 16 allocator scenario.

The exact symbol names and placement should follow current source/linker conventions.
Do not hard-code duplicate numeric pool addresses in Zig if linker symbols can remain the canonical source of truth.

The pool should be deliberately small and bounded. A value such as 8 pages is sufficient unless current constraints justify another small fixed count.

The verifier must independently inspect the ELF symbols and recompute the pool interval rather than trusting a printed PASS claim.


BARE-TRANSLATION TRUTH

The current freestanding path has not yet claimed active Sv39 virtual memory.

Directly dereferencing physical addresses is valid for this bounded exercise only if the machine is actually executing with address translation disabled / Bare in the relevant phase.

Do not silently assume a linker address equals a physical address.

Batch 16 must mechanically establish the translation-mode condition used by the proof. Prefer evidence tied to the actual satp state on the real machine and independently parsed by the verifier.

The verifier should reject evidence that claims direct physical-frame access while the declared translation mode is not Bare.

Do not introduce an Alpz virtual-memory compatibility name yet.

ONE-SENTENCE PREVENTABLE:

Do not treat a linker address as a directly dereferenceable physical frame unless the ELF placement, pool bounds, and actual translation mode make that identity relationship explicit.


USE THE EXISTING MEMORY MODULES

The preferred composition is conceptually:

linker-owned pool begin/end
→ PhysicalAddress
→ PhysicalMemoryRegionSet(...).add(..., .usable)
→ PhysicalPageFrameAllocator(...).initFromRegions(...)
→ allocate / release using the existing public contract

Discover and use the exact current APIs rather than reconstructing them from this prose.

The allocator should remain target-neutral.
Do not teach projects/36-physical-page-frame-allocator about:

RISC-V CSRs
OpenSBI
QEMU
ELF symbols
linker scripts
stvec
satp policy
Morphic output

Machine-specific ownership setup belongs at the freestanding integration boundary.

Do not generalize the allocator to multiple regions, NUMA, DMA, zones, buddy allocation, per-CPU caches, or production kernel policy unless a concrete correctness requirement of this bounded proof makes such work unavoidable.


MINIMUM REAL-MACHINE SCENARIO

Create the smallest scenario that proves actual ownership and allocator behavior.

A strong bounded scenario should prove all of the following on each real machine run:

1. The linker-owned pool begins and ends at page-aligned addresses.
2. Pool size is an exact positive multiple of the repository's canonical page size.
3. Runtime-reported pool bounds match the compiled ELF symbols.
4. Translation mode is the declared Bare mode during direct frame access.
5. The pool is represented through the existing physical-memory region machinery.
6. The existing PhysicalPageFrameAllocator initializes from that usable region.
7. Exactly the declared bounded number of frames can be allocated.
8. Every allocated frame is page aligned and entirely within the owned pool.
9. Allocated frame addresses are unique while simultaneously owned.
10. At least a small representative subset, preferably every frame in the tiny pool, is actually written through and read back on the real machine using bounded sentinel data.
11. One additional allocation after full ownership returns the allocator's declared exhaustion error.
12. At least one owned frame is released successfully.
13. Releasing that same frame again produces the declared double-free rejection.
14. Releasing a definitely foreign frame produces the declared foreign-frame rejection.
15. A released frame can be allocated again according to the allocator's existing deterministic semantics, if that behavior is part of current implementation truth and can be proven without adding a new guarantee accidentally.
16. Final owned/free counts reconcile exactly.
17. The scenario terminates and normal Morphic execution continues.

Do not fabricate addresses in the real-machine proof.
Do not use a software-only fake allocator as evidence that real physical addresses were exercised.

If the exact allocator contract makes one requested real-machine rejection awkward to expose without contaminating the integration boundary, keep that rejection in focused module/self-test evidence and document the split. Do not add unnatural public APIs solely to print an error.


REAL MEMORY ACCESS

The proof should demonstrate that allocated frames correspond to actual writable memory in the real QEMU machine, not merely integers returned by an allocator.

Use bounded deterministic sentinel patterns.

For example, for each allocated frame:

- derive the physical address through the canonical frame/address conversion machinery where appropriate;
- write a small fixed amount of data at a defined offset inside the owned frame;
- read it back;
- emit enough raw evidence for the verifier to check the relationship.

Do not scan entire pages.
Do not perform unbounded memory tests.
Do not claim ECC, cache coherency, persistence, DMA suitability, hardware health, or production memory-test coverage.

The verifier should validate relationships, not merely trust `write-read=PASS` strings.


EVIDENCE FRAMING

Add a distinct bounded Batch 16 frame rather than changing the meaning of Batch 15 evidence.

Use a repository-consistent ZIGREF_* frame, for example conceptually:

ZIGREF_PHYSICAL_MEMORY_BEGIN
...
ZIGREF_PHYSICAL_MEMORY_END
ZIGREF_PHYSICAL_MEMORY_RETURNED

The exact field names should be compact and deterministic.

The frame must expose enough independent raw facts to prove:

- compiled pool page count;
- page size;
- runtime pool begin/end;
- translation mode / satp evidence;
- region count/kind needed for this scenario;
- initial free/allocated counts;
- allocated frame numbers or addresses;
- uniqueness/bounds/alignment;
- memory write/read sentinel evidence;
- exhaustion result;
- release result;
- double-free/foreign-frame rejection evidence where exercised;
- reacquisition result if applicable;
- final counts;
- completion/return marker;
- continuation to previous evidence/Morphic execution.

Use fixed-capacity telemetry and deterministic formatting.
No unbounded logs or heap allocation.

A PASS string alone is never sufficient evidence.


FOCUSED VERIFIER

Add one canonical verifier consistent with the existing sequence, preferably:

tools/verify-freestanding-riscv64-physical-memory.py

It must support:

--self-test

and real execution mode.

The self-test must be rejection-oriented.

At minimum reject malformed evidence for:

- missing frame;
- duplicate frame;
- duplicate/unexpected fields;
- missing completion/return marker;
- wrong page size;
- non-page-aligned pool begin/end;
- zero or inconsistent pool size;
- runtime pool bounds that disagree with ELF symbols;
- non-Bare translation evidence when direct physical access is claimed;
- wrong frame count;
- duplicate simultaneously allocated frame;
- frame outside the owned pool;
- unaligned frame;
- missing or contradictory sentinel readback;
- exhaustion not observed at the declared bound;
- ownership/free-count mismatch;
- malformed release/rejection evidence;
- regression/malformed Batch 12/13/14/15 frames;
- Morphic payload drift.

Real mode must:

1. Build the current freestanding RISC-V artifact.
2. Inspect ELF identity and the actual pool begin/end symbols.
3. Prove the linker-owned pool is page aligned and has the declared bounded size.
4. Run at least two bounded real qemu-system-riscv64 machines with finite timeout.
5. Parse the new physical-memory frame independently.
6. Recompute every allocation bound/alignment/uniqueness relationship from raw evidence.
7. Tie runtime pool bounds to ELF symbols.
8. Prove the declared translation mode needed for direct memory access.
9. Check the real write/read sentinel relationship.
10. Check exhaustion and ownership-count reconciliation.
11. Reuse existing Batch 12/13/14/15 parsers/verifiers where practical instead of duplicating their semantics.
12. Preserve exact canonical Morphic equality across native hosted, fake, and both real machine runs.
13. Fail nonzero on timeout, malformed, duplicate, missing, contradictory, stale, or out-of-bounds evidence.
14. End through Developer Minimus.

The two real runs do not need different page addresses if the ELF layout is deterministic. They must independently execute the real machine scenario and prove the same ownership relationships.


PRESERVE PREVIOUS MACHINE PROOFS

Batch 16 must preserve all established machine milestones.

At minimum preserve mechanically:

Batch 12:
real synchronous breakpoint trap and sret return

Batch 13:
real one-shot supervisor timer interrupt and explicit neutralization

Batch 14:
four real monotonic supervisor timer ticks, three re-arms, final neutralization, four returns, no extra delivery

Batch 15:
real rdtime observations consumed by the existing scheduler, readiness [1,2,0,1], stable order [1@0,2@1,3@1,4@3], decisions after sret

Morphic:
exact canonical 765-byte equality across hosted/fake/real machine paths unless current repository truth has deliberately changed before execution; if so, establish the new baseline mechanically rather than silently weakening equality.

Do not edit old verifiers merely to make preservation easier.


DO NOT BUILD THESE YET

Do not implement:

Sv39 activation
satp page-table installation
sfence.vma policy beyond existing reusable module tests
kernel virtual-address remapping
higher-half kernel
U-mode
per-process address spaces
copy-on-write
page faults as allocation policy
user memory copy helpers
syscall entry
ELF user loading
fork/clone/execve
Linux mmap/brk
POSIX memory APIs
DTB parsing
platform RAM discovery
general RAM reclamation
buddy/slab allocator
heap allocator
DMA allocator
NUMA
SMP/per-hart allocators
VirtIO
filesystem
networking
musl
BusyBox
Alpine /init

Those are later pressures.


LINKER AND IMAGE INTEGRITY

Any linker-script change is part of the proof surface.

The new page pool must not overlap the existing stack or silently move required trap/entry symbols into an invalid relationship.

The verifier should inspect enough ELF symbol information to establish:

pool_begin < pool_end
pool_begin % PageSize == 0
pool_end % PageSize == 0
pool_end - pool_begin == expected_pool_pages * PageSize

and, where symbols are available or can be exposed cleanly, disjointness from the stack interval and relevant image-owned intervals.

Do not rely solely on source-text inspection of the linker script.
Use the built ELF as evidence.


COMMANDS, RECIPE TRUTH, AND DOCUMENTATION

Update COMMANDS.md with the canonical Batch 16 self-test and real execution commands.

Update the relevant recipe contract/metadata so it truthfully states:

- the freestanding path now owns one bounded linker-reserved physical page pool;
- the existing physical region/frame allocator machinery is exercised against it;
- direct physical access is proven only under the declared Bare translation condition;
- the proof is bounded and not platform RAM discovery or a production PMM;
- Sv39 remains inactive.

Do not overclaim.

Add:

docs/reports/AGENTIC_SNOWBALL_BATCH_16.md

The report must include:

Starting point
First executable gate
Task Projection
Existing capabilities reused
Linker-owned pool design
Bare-translation proof
Real allocation/access scenario
Rejection-oriented verifier
Preservation matrix
Snowball Yield
One-Sentence Preventables
Non-claims
Next smallest pressure

Snowball Yield must be factual bookkeeping, not benchmark marketing.
Record what existing machinery was reused, what genuinely new glue/proof machinery was added, and whether any reusable module had to change.

If a new vocabulary term is introduced that is absent from the repository's canonical vocabulary documentation, add it there. Do not invent terminology unnecessarily.


VALIDATION

Before publication, run the focused Batch 16 self-test and real lab plus the established preservation surfaces.

At minimum:

python3 tools/verify-freestanding-riscv64-physical-memory.py --self-test
python3 tools/verify-freestanding-riscv64-physical-memory.py
python3 tools/verify-freestanding-riscv64-scheduler-time.py --self-test
python3 tools/verify-freestanding-riscv64-scheduler-time.py

Then run the repository's canonical aggregate validation from COMMANDS.md / Developer Minimus guidance, including the ordinary repository validation pipeline.

Do not invent stale validation commands if COMMANDS.md provides canonical equivalents.

Correct any generated/index/contract artifacts required by repository policy.

Do not manually edit generated evidence when the repository provides a generator.


SUCCESS STANDARD

Batch 16 is PASS only if all of the following are mechanically demonstrated:

- current Batch 15 proof passes before implementation;
- a fixed page-aligned memory pool is owned by the freestanding image through linker-defined bounds;
- runtime bounds match the built ELF symbols;
- the translation state required for direct physical access is explicitly proven;
- the existing PhysicalMemoryRegionSet represents the owned range truthfully;
- the existing PhysicalPageFrameAllocator is actually used by the real freestanding path;
- the bounded declared number of frames can be allocated and no more;
- every allocated frame is unique, aligned, and inside the owned interval;
- real memory at allocated frame addresses is written/read successfully through bounded sentinel evidence;
- release/exhaustion/ownership semantics are validated to the extent declared by the scenario;
- final allocation/free accounting reconciles;
- no arbitrary platform RAM is claimed or touched;
- no Sv39 activation, U-mode, syscall, Linux ABI, or unrelated subsystem is introduced;
- Batch 12/13/14/15 machine proofs remain valid;
- canonical Morphic equality remains exact;
- rejection-oriented self-tests pass;
- two real bounded QEMU runs pass;
- repository aggregate validation passes;
- COMMANDS.md and recipe truth are updated;
- Batch 16 report and Snowball Yield are recorded;
- changes are committed and published;
- a mergeable pull request is produced.

Do not claim PASS based only on compilation, unit tests, printed PASS strings, or synthetic allocator behavior.


FAILURE DISCIPLINE

If the real integration exposes a defect in the existing memory modules, do not hide it behind freestanding-only special cases.

Localize the failure.
Determine whether the problem belongs to:

linker ownership
physical address conversion
region representation
allocator semantics
freestanding adapter
Bare-translation assumption
verifier

Repair the canonical layer when appropriate.
Add focused regression evidence.
Record the newly reusable fact.

If evidence is insufficient, report UNKNOWN rather than inventing ownership.


PUBLICATION

Complete the implementation rather than stopping at analysis.

Before handing off:

- implementation complete;
- focused self-test complete;
- two-run real QEMU proof complete;
- previous machine proofs preserved;
- exact Morphic equality preserved;
- aggregate repository validation complete;
- documentation/contracts/generated truth updated;
- Batch 16 report complete;
- Snowball Yield complete;
- commits created;
- branch published;
- mergeable PR opened.

Do not create, move, delete, or rewrite historical evidence tags unless explicitly instructed by the maintainer.


LONG-HORIZON ALPZ DIRECTION

The long-horizon objective remains:

KEEP LINUX USERSPACE. REPLACE LINUX AT THE KERNEL BOUNDARY.

Linux is the external contract.
Alpine is intended as the first major distribution proof.
Debian and Fedora are later broad compatibility proofs, not separate kernel ABIs.

Batch 16 earns none of those compatibility claims.

What it should earn is much narrower and foundational:

Alpz can prove ownership of a bounded set of real physical page frames in its freestanding RISC-V execution and exercise the repository's existing physical-memory allocator against those frames without guessing about platform memory.

That is enough.

The likely next pressure after a clean Batch 16 is active Sv39 page-table ownership and installation using the now-proven physical-page foundation, still in a bounded kernel-only scenario before U-mode.


FINAL RULE

DO NOT REDISCOVER WHAT Z-REF ALREADY KNOWS.
DO NOT CLAIM MEMORY YOU DO NOT OWN.
DO NOT CALL AN ADDRESS PHYSICAL BECAUSE IT LOOKS PHYSICAL.
DO NOT ACTIVATE PAGING UNTIL THIS OWNERSHIP BOUNDARY IS PROVEN.
DO NOT CLAIM PASS WITHOUT REAL MACHINE EVIDENCE.

The desired Batch 16 result is deliberately small in concept and large in consequence:

real owned page frames
+
existing reusable allocator
+
mechanical evidence
=
first trustworthy physical-memory foundation for the future Alpz virtual-memory path.
